---
layout: post
title: Italy, Day 1, Roma
category: travel
comments: false
published: true
---

We've just arrived in Rome after the overnight flight from New York.  It's about
noon when the taxi turns onto Via della Croce from Via die Babuino.  The street
is barely wide enough for a single car and there is plenty of foot traffic, so
the driver tells us we'll need to walk the rest of the way.  I pay the fare, and
we start walking.  Luckily the hotel is only a couple of short blocks away.  We
soon arrive at the address.  From the street there is a single door and a list
of names with buttons next to the door, like you would see on an apartment.  I
push the button next to "Town Houses Spagna", and we are let in.  We are greeted
at the first floor (what we consider the _second_ floor is considered the first
floor in Italy) by Paolo, the inn keeper.  He speaks english, but with an
italian accent that at times almost sounds australian.  Paolo takes our
passports and notices that Monique's birthday will be on Monday.  After looking
at a calendar over his right shoulder he tells Monique, "I have a present for
you.  I upgrade you to the executive room."  The hotel has eight guest rooms,
the lobby and a dining room.  Its simple and small, but recently renovated.
Paolo leads us to the "executive room", which is separate from the other rooms.
The room itself is nothing fancy, but it has plenty of space and a nice window
overlooking a center courtyard.

After settling into the room and freshening up a little, we head out and grab a
taxi.  We have reservations for a tour of the Vatican Necropolis and can't be
late.  We arrive at the entrance to Piazza San Pietro after the short cab ride.
St. Peter's Basilica is remarkable, even before going inside.  It's about 1:00
so we spend some time exploring the piazza.  Every corner is something new to
see, the fountains, the statues, the buildings.  Around 2:30 we make our way to
the side entrance of the basilica, where two members of the Swiss Guard check
our reservation and give us directions to the Uficio Scavi.

Our tour starts through a back entrance to the Vatican crypt.  The crypt is one
level below the floor of the basilica.  Our tour guide is Christian, from
Transylvania.  He speaks broken, yet understandable english, and perfect latin
(or at least it sounds like it when he reads the inscriptions).  After some
brief history about the basilica and necropolis, the tour heads underground.
There is a brick wall in front of us, with an opening the size of a small door,
like you would find under a stair case.  The glass door that covers the opening
looks oddly out of place amongst the old brick wall.  Christian punches a code
into the keypad next to the door and glass slides out the way.  As each person
walks through the door, a sensor counts us off, one-by-one, to make sure that
everyone who goes in makes their way out.  The juxtaposition of high-tech
security against millennia-old structures is not lost on me.  Just steps beyond
the door, we are on Main Street in the center of an underground city, two levels
below the basilica.  The Necropolis is made up of dozens of two-story tall
mausoleums.  They were built one next to another, with a path running down the
middle, like a street of houses in a city.  We're able to look inside several of
the mausoleums and see the intricate sculpture and mosaics inside.  Christian
discusses the themes seen in some of the mosaics, specifically how many of them
combine the pagan and early christian motifs.

The tour progresses and now we are focusing on the tomb of St. Peter.  Christian
expounds on how the excavation happened, and how it is that scholars are as
certain as possible that the tomb and relics are in fact those of St. Peter.
The key points all revolve around the geography of the basilica.  St. Peter was
buried in a common, unmarked tomb, near the the place where he was crucified.
In the century following his death, a very small monument (less than two meters
tall) was erected directly over the ground where the tomb was located.  have to
with the fact that the basilica was built on the place of St. Peter's tomb, not
far from where the he was crucified.  Part of this monument still stands and is
visible from under the crypt.  Constantine later built a larger monument, over
and around the original.  When the first basilica was built, the top of the
Constantine monument was used as the base of the basilica altar.  When the
current basilica was eventually built, the new altar was placed over the
previous one. [[ FACT CHECKS ]]

We are led into another small room, whose only distinct feature is a small
window looking into another excavation.  This one is especially interesting, in
that one of the columns of the original monument is visible.  From here you can
get a clear sense of the orientation of monument.  And here we stand, within
steps from the place of St. Peter's original tomb, almost 2000 years ago.  From
here we head up a set of stairs into very ornate chapel.  This is Clements
Chapel.  The chapel was built by Pope Gregory, but refinished by Clement.  The
altar has a small window that looks down onto the monument we were just looking
at from the room below.  Clearly this chapel was built with the original
monument in mind.

TODO: more on the necropolis.



